Task Outputs, Metrics, and Visualizations
=========================================

This page describes outputs implemented by the current task, training,
evaluation, visualization, and optimization code. ``project_root`` below means
``experiment.project_root``. HDF5 contents are documented separately in
:doc:`HDF5_structure`.

At a glance
-----------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 28 27 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Task or workflow
     - Metrics
     - Visualizations
     - Primary outputs
   * - Feature extraction
     - None
     - Tile overview and thumbnail when configured; optional PDF tile report
     - Per-slide HDF5 artifacts
   * - Classification MIL
     - ``accuracy``, ``balanced_accuracy``, ``f1``, ``auroc``, ``pr_auc``,
       ``brier_score``
     - Confusion matrix, ROC, precision-recall, calibration
     - Checkpoint, model package, validation JSON files
   * - Regression MIL
     - ``mae``, ``mse``, ``rmse``, ``r2``
     - Prediction scatter and residual histogram
     - Checkpoint, model package, validation JSON files
   * - Survival / discrete survival MIL
     - ``c_index``, ``td_auc``, ``brier_score``, ``num_eval_times``
     - Kaplan-Meier, time-dependent AUC, Brier-score, concordance-index plots
     - Checkpoint, model package, validation JSON files
   * - Slide retrieval
     - ``hit_at_k``, ``precision_at_k``, ``map_at_k``, ``ndcg_at_k``,
       ``mmv_at_k``, ``macro_f1_at_k``
     - Retrieval-result panels and retrieval-representation images
     - Ranked results, manifest, evaluation JSON, PNG files
   * - Pipeline optimization
     - Configured objective value per trial
     - Optimization history, parameter importance, rank, timeline; optional
       hypervolume history
     - Raw and ranked trial CSV files plus HTML/PNG plots

Feature extraction
------------------

Feature extraction writes one artifact per slide beneath each dataset's
``artifacts_dir``. Stored content includes coordinates, a tiling specification,
and feature matrices. Depending on config and workflow it may also include a
thumbnail, tissue information, encoded tile overview, or heatmap groups. See
:doc:`HDF5_structure` for the canonical paths and shapes.

Feature extraction itself computes no predictive metrics. When
``experiment.report: true`` is used, tile overview data can be rendered through
``pathforge report tiles`` into PDF reports.

Trained MIL tasks
-----------------

Classification, regression, survival, and discrete-survival tasks share the
Lightning training output layout:

.. code-block:: text

   <project_root>/
   ├── checkpoints/
   │   ├── <best-checkpoint>.ckpt
   │   └── <best-checkpoint>_package.pt
   ├── training_artifacts/
   │   ├── val_metrics.json
   │   ├── val_curves.json
   │   └── val_<task-specific-figure>.png
   └── lightning_logs/

``metrics.*_metrics`` selects scalar values written to ``val_metrics.json``.
``val_curves.json`` retains the arrays used to create the figures. Figures are
generated from the validation predictions after the best checkpoint is loaded.

Classification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Available scalar metrics are ``accuracy``, ``balanced_accuracy``, ``f1``,
``auroc``, ``pr_auc``, and ``brier_score``. Brier score is produced for binary
classification. Available figures are:

- ``val_confusion_matrix.png``
- ``val_roc_auc_curve.png``
- ``val_pr_auc_curve.png``
- ``val_calibration_curve.png``

.. code-block:: yaml

   experiment:
     task: classification
   metrics:
     classification_metrics:
       [accuracy, balanced_accuracy, f1, auroc, pr_auc, brier_score]

Regression
~~~~~~~~~~

Available scalar metrics are ``mae``, ``mse``, ``rmse``, and ``r2``. Available
figures are ``val_regression_scatter.png`` and ``val_residuals.png``.

.. code-block:: yaml

   experiment:
     task: regression
   metrics:
     regression_metrics: [mae, mse, rmse, r2]

Survival and discrete survival
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Selectable scalar metrics are ``c_index``, ``td_auc``, ``brier_score``, and
``num_eval_times``. The metrics payload also computes supporting time-dependent
AUC summaries internally. Available figures are data-dependent:

- ``val_kaplan_meier.png``
- ``val_td_auc_curve.png``
- ``val_brier_score_curve.png``
- ``val_concordance_index.png``

Some curves require enough valid event times and may be omitted when the
validation data cannot support them.

.. code-block:: yaml

   experiment:
     task: survival
   metrics:
     survival_metrics: [c_index, td_auc, brier_score, num_eval_times]

Training visualization scope
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The classification, regression, and survival figures above are generated by
the trainer; they are not selected through ``evaluation.visualization``.
Config-driven ``pathforge evaluate`` and ``pathforge visualize`` adapters are
currently implemented only for ``slide_retrieval``. Requesting those workflows
for another task will not create the training figures.

Slide retrieval
---------------

A benchmark run writes:

.. code-block:: text

   <project_root>/eval_slide_retrieval/
     <tiling-and-feature>/<representation>/<search>/run_<hash>/
       manifest.json
       query_results.xlsx
       evaluation_metrics.json               # after `pathforge evaluate run`
       vis_retrieval_results/*.png            # after visualization

Representation images live at the representation root in
``vis_retrieval_representation/*.png`` because they are not tied to one search
run. See :doc:`slide-retrieval-results-and-metrics` for the complete hierarchy
and JSON payload.

Metrics use a positive cutoff in their config name, for example
``precision_at_5``. Available metric families are:

- ``hit_at_k``: at least one relevant result in the top *k*.
- ``precision_at_k``: relevant fraction of the top *k*.
- ``map_at_k``: mean average precision, rewarding early relevant results.
- ``ndcg_at_k``: normalized discounted cumulative gain.
- ``mmv_at_k``: majority-match vote among the top *k*.
- ``macro_f1_at_k``: macro F1 after top-*k* label voting.

Available visualization names are:

- ``retrieval_results``: one query-and-ranked-hits panel per selected query.
- ``retrieval_representation``: one image visualizing each selected stored
  representation.

.. code-block:: yaml

   experiment:
     task: slide_retrieval
     aggregation_level: slide
   evaluation:
     label_column: category
     metrics:
       [hit_at_5, precision_at_5, map_at_5, ndcg_at_5,
        mmv_at_5, macro_f1_at_5]
     visualization: [retrieval_results, retrieval_representation]
     visualization_subset_file: null
   slide_retrieval:
     visualization_top_k: 10
     visualization_metadata_columns: [patient, category]

Run the stages explicitly:

.. code-block:: console

   pathforge benchmark run --config retrieval.yaml
   pathforge evaluate run --config retrieval.yaml
   pathforge visualize run --config retrieval.yaml

Pipeline optimization
---------------------

Pipeline optimization writes the complete Optuna trials table and a ranked
summary:

.. code-block:: text

   <project_root>/
   ├── <study_name>_results.csv
   ├── optimization_results.csv
   └── optimization_visualizations/
       ├── plot_optimization_history.html
       ├── plot_param_importances.html
       ├── plot_rank.html
       ├── plot_timeline.html
       └── corresponding PNG files when static export is available

For multi-objective studies with a usable reference point, PathForge may also
write ``plot_hypervolume_history.html`` and PNG. A plot can be skipped when the
study has insufficient completed trials or the required plotting backend is
unavailable. Search dimensions must be declared in config as described in
:doc:`mil_options` and :doc:`tutorials/optimization`.

Inference
---------

Config-driven inference creates a timestamped invocation directory containing
``inference_input.csv``, ``config_snapshot.yaml``, and ``manifest.json`` under
``<project_root>/inference/<task>_<timestamp>/``. The current task-level
inference implementation is slide retrieval; its task outputs use the same
ranked-results and manifest contracts described above. Packaged-model MIL
inference and heatmap outputs are documented in :doc:`tutorials/inference`.
